---
layout: post
title: "The Role of Conservatives"
comments: false
description: "Conservatives have long debated the meaning of the ideology, philosophy, or attitude called “conservatism.”"
categories: essays
---

Conservatives have long debated the meaning of the ideology, philosophy, or attitude called “conservatism.” In ISI’s anthology of essays, “What is Conservatism?” the authors are so far from agreeing that one, Hayek, entitled his essay, “Why I Am Not a Conservative.” To this day, it is common to see articles in conservative publications describing or defining what “we” believe.

The problem becomes more difficult when we realize that those who call themselves “conservative” are usually also Christian. Inasmuch as one is a Christian, Christ is the center of his worldview, with reference to whom all other things have their place. He cannot be a Christian and a Marxist, because Marxism is an ideology which competes with Christianity. He cannot (except by confusion of thought) be a Christian and a liberal, because liberalism is an all-encompassing worldview set over and against Christianity. And he cannot be a Christian and a conservative, unless conservatism is a part of Christianity or assimilable to it. This is as much as to say that conservatism cannot be an ideology or worldview, but is a set of opinions or an attitude which Christians have in common with each other and even with some who have not yet converted.

The question stands, what is conservatism? Conservatism is that attitude the task and goal of which is the defense of the common person as an individual. Everywhere we see the common person under attack. This is true politically. All the things that make life worth living for the common person as an individual—in short, all the things that people like and have always liked—are under attack by politicians and their acolytes in the media. This means the family, the church, the two sexes, common modes of speech, the freedom to live a normal life. Tucker Carlson has done a better job than anyone of documenting this political attack on the common person as an individual. Who, he asks, does such-and-such a policy hurt? It hurts you.

But why say “the common person _as an individual_?” An example might help. What does it mean for the family to be under attack? It means birth rates will decrease, anti-social forms of recreation will increase, and society will suffer all sorts of dislocations. But social utility is not the most relevant measure of the harm done by the destruction of the family. Individuals will suffer, precisely because the family is good for individuals. Here is one reason why. The family is the most individualistic of all institutions besides the Church. The family is an institution in which each member truly matters as an individual, in which he will be missed if he is gone. This is not true of many secular institutions. Remove one member from a family, and a gaping whole is left behind; remove one member from a corporation, and his place has been filled within a week.

If the task and goal of political conservatism is the political defense of the common person as an individual, the task and goal of intellectual conservatism is the intellectual defense of the common person as an individual. What does this mean?

It will be found that certain cynical and depressing beliefs have spread among people in the West. Examples of this are so obvious they are commonplace. One will hear the typical modern—a liberal, college-educated urbanite—expressing, in moments of candor, his views about the biggest things. It might be shocking to discover that he is a nihilist. He believes that life is meaningless, that there is no afterlife, that human nature is unfixed and endowed with no real dignity, that free will is an illusion, that reason is narrowly limited, that the evolution of species is the past, that a defunct mass of gray matter is the present, that artificial intelligence is the future, etc.

It might be an even greater shock to discover that many Trump-voting, rural-dwelling conservatives have likewise imbibed certain characteristically modern beliefs. They too believe that there is no God and that man is descended from apes. They might even joke about man merging with the machine. They too are continually swallowing down a current of bitterness which surfaces in candid moments.

Both groups have no sense of the sanctity of things, because they believe that everything is a mere composition of atoms swirling randomly in the void. The things we talk about in life are mere approximations of their physical state, and should be treated with all the reverence due to things of their kind. Whether justified by “science” or not, this sort of thing is depressing for most people. They are harmed by the vague sentimental associations of materialism.

Beliefs of this sort are propagated subtly and in some cases unconsciously by journalists and comedians, podcasters and social media users, celebrity scientists and public intellectuals, educators and the man on the street. But it will be found that there is a class of persons who are systematic about the whole thing. There is a class of persons who seem to delight in taking away everything that makes life worth living for the common person. If political moderns attack the family as an institution, intellectual moderns go one better. They attack the very basis of the family, which is love. They say that love is nothing but a biochemical impulse and is cosmically meaningless. If political moderns attack the Church as an institution, intellectual moderns vainly attack God. If political moderns attack beautiful things, intellectual moderns attack beauty. They say that morality is subjective and truth subjective. They say that reason is weak and free will illusory. They say that mind is an “epiphenomenon” of matter, whatever that means. And on and on and on.

These things harm the common person, and again, they harm him as an individual. The last solace of the individual, the last defense of the individual is not something which can be provided by the state or even by science. It is truth, morality, love, something of that category. The perfections of creation—things that are most properly predicated of God—make individuals happy and free.

Conservatives, then, must defend the things that people enjoy. Political conservatives must attack political correctness, because the common person is anything but politically correct. They must defend family and church, because family and church are good for people. Intellectual conservatives must defend the ideas that make for human dignity. They should defend virtue and freedom. Take a more ambitious example: they should expose the flaws in the neo-Darwinian theory of evolution. It will be found that men like Stephen Meyer—whether consciously or not—have done the job of conservatives better than many conservatives themselves.

But conservatives should not stop at a scientific criticism of false and dangerous scientific theories. To defend the common person means to defend human nature. To defend human nature means to recover or restore the study of human nature; which, in turn, means to revive the pre-modern tradition of Western philosophy and theology; which, once more, means to exert great intellectual force in criticizing the errors of modern philosophy. The task is nothing less than a theological one, for it is only by an appeal to ultimate truths that what is human can be defended against what is not human.
