---
layout: post
title: "What's Wrong With Liberalism"
comments: false
description: "Most conservatives agree that liberalism is a failed ideology."
categories: essays
---

Most conservatives agree that liberalism is a failed ideology. It has taken a great toll on human happiness wherever it has been tried. But we often distinguish between an older form of liberalism—call it classical or traditional liberalism—and the current raving, lunatic liberalism that burns our cities. This distinction is useful and true. But some conservatives go so far as to say that classical liberalism is good and ought to be preserved—even that it is the proper inheritance of contemporary conservatives, that conservatism in America means nothing more than classical liberalism.

I want to argue that far from being a departure from classical liberalism, modern liberalism is the culmination of it; that all the flaws in modern liberalism are inherent in classical liberalism.

For most of its history, the development of liberalism is continuous. It remains recognizably itself. It affirms certain rights and freedoms: freedom of speech or expression, freedom of religion, freedom of assembly, freedom of movement, the right to self-government, the right to a fair trial, the right to education, the right to a reasonably high standard of living. So far so good. But at a certain point, liberalism loses its head, and we first encounter modern radical liberalism, actively nihilistic, whining, screaming, immature, intolerant. The question is, how do we get from the liberalism of our fathers—which, blurring distinctions, I’ll call “traditional liberalism”—to modern liberalism, which seems so different from it?

Some people will answer that modern liberalism has its origin in postmodernism, Marxism, or something else foreign to the liberal tradition; so that modern liberalism is a departure from, perhaps a reaction to, certainly a rejection of traditional liberalism. But again, I want to argue that modern liberalism is the next stage in the development of traditional liberalism.

First, let us examine the philosophical roots of traditional liberalism. Traditional liberalism at its most harmless says something like this: people should be free to work out their own conception of the good and act on it; to formulate their own values and live by them. And this is truly wonderful. We should encourage each other in this. We should not hinder each other. At least we should leave each other alone. Why do we have to be so intolerant, why do we have to be so dogmatic, why do we we have to impose our own personal opinions on others? Why not all pull together? Why not support each other as we try to be our best selves, live our best lives? This is traditional liberalism at its most innocent.

But this is still fuzzy. It needs to be formulated more carefully. It needs to be translated out of layman’s terms. The person who does this best is John Stuart Mill, whose writings are very clear and coherent for those wishing to understand traditional liberalism. John Stuart Mill said something like this: we are free to do whatever we want, so long as we do not infringe on the freedom of others to do the same. In other words, he starts from the principle that we are free. But there is a problem. If I am free to do whatever I want, I can limit your freedom to do whatever you want. Therefore, I must be free within certain limits, namely that I am not allowed to limit your freedom.[^1]

At this point, we start to recognize a principle of tolerance. Indeed, liberalism might be described or defined as the ideology of tolerance. The idea is that, if I have a right to freedom, I have a corresponding duty to tolerate others in the exercise of their freedom. But there is a problem. Tolerance in the Western tradition is a pseudo-value. In other words, it is good to the extent that it participates in greater, truer values. It is not a good in its own right. A Christian who tries to be charitable toward his neighbors and humble in his personal disposition will probably be reasonably tolerant. He will not assume the worst about his neighbor. He will not impose his convictions on him at gunpoint, even if they are true, because that would be contrary to respect for his personhood. He will recognize that a gentle approach is often prudent. He will even recognize that, though his crucial beliefs are certain, he does not have all the answers. Sometimes he will be on the losing side, or in the minority, and tolerate simply because he has no choice. Tolerance of this kind is a temporary, necessary compromise with error.

These are some of the legitimate forms of tolerance. They are dictates of prudence, charity, humility; none of them is absolute. They exist within well-defined limits. This is tolerance as practiced by someone who believes in truth. Let us look at another kind of tolerance. Someone who does not believe in truth may also be tolerant, but for very different reasons. He is tolerant simply because he does not believe that one opinion or lifestyle is better than another. For that reason, he tolerates them all. This kind of tolerance is improperly named, since in order to tolerate something, one must disapprove it.

We can tell which kind of tolerance we are faced with in this way. If someone is tolerant within limits, he probably believes in truth. If he exalts tolerance into an absolute value, he is a relativist. We know that liberal tolerance is based on relativism, because the liberal does not draw a line. He does not say, thus far and no further. He does not say, we will tolerate this limited set of disordered actions, but go beyond them, and you are going too far. We are not going to tolerate that anymore, for your own good, because we love you, and want the best for you. No, he says, do whatever you want, and we will tolerate it.

There is one qualification to be made. No one can tolerate everyone; no one can tolerate everything. If you tolerate everything, you have no ideas, you cannot act in the world, you cannot take part in politics, you cannot make judgments, because you cannot distinguish better from worse, good from bad.

Liberals cannot tolerate everyone. Who do they tolerate and who do they not tolerate? The limit is this: they cannot tolerate those whom they perceive to be intolerant. Who is that? That is anyone who believes in truth, anyone who has standards. This explains a strange paradox. In our society, the people who by any measure are the best people, those with the highest standards of personal conduct, the most devout Christians, who try to love even their enemies, these are the people who are excluded from civil discourse. Again, this is strange at first sight, but there is a reason for it. These people have standards, they believe in truth, they are exclusive to the extent that they use their reason to form judgments. So they are considered intolerant by people who do not believe in truth. This is how an earlier form of liberalism that at least pretends to be tolerant is transformed into a later form that is scrupulously intolerant.

Here is another way of saying it. Liberal tolerance is limited by the principle which underlies it. If anyone transgresses that principle, he has transgressed against a principle more fundamental than liberal tolerance, and one without which it cannot stand. This is intolerable.

There are some further consequences to be drawn from liberal relativism. The main one is that chaos and confusion will break out. In other words, if we reject truth, we lose any principle of action that can guide us individually or collectively. One would expect society to grind to a halt. But that is not quite what happens, for two reasons. First, truth can never be entirely replaced as a principle of action. The impulse to truth is replaced by the impulse to ideology. This must be expanded on elsewhere. Secondly, we have drives which can replace truth as a principle of action. These are what are called impulses, instincts, passions. One of them is the will to power. When truth disappears, power steps into the void. This manifests itself in a variety of ways. Some people will commit acts of violent destruction in an undisciplined manner. Others will conquer the world in a disciplined manner. And they will do so unimpeded, because good people will have been rendered unable to resist evil. This is the meaning of the lines in “The Second Coming”: “The best lack all conviction, while the worst / Are full of passionate intensity.” They are a description of the necessary consequences of relativism.

This account of liberal relativism explains something which might seem uncanny. A few shrewd observers in the nineteenth century were able to predict the horrors of the twentieth century and the social dislocations of our own. They were able to do so by a very simple principle. Anyone can be a prophet by predicting the consequences that will follow from the rejection of truth. Granted one thing, that people will reject the truth, anyone can predict in the most accurate general terms everything that will follow. Reject truth, and things will become scattered, the parts of our souls which ought to be subordinate to reason will assert themselves, and both individuals and society will fall into a state of lawlessness and division.

[^1]: Cf. “The only freedom which deserves the name is that of pursuing our own good in our own way, so long as we do not attempt to deprive others of theirs, or impede their efforts to obtain it. Each is the proper guardian of his own health, whether bodily, or mental or spiritual. Mankind are greater gainers by suffering each other to live as seems good to themselves, than by compelling each to live as seems good to the rest.”
