---
layout: post
title: "Satire"
comments: false
description: 'The softened colors of his dream-world fade;  / His dreams of Philly and Miami-Dade ...'
categories: poems
---

<div class="p">The softened colors of his dream-world fade;</div>
<div class="p">His dreams of Philly and Miami-Dade</div>
<div class="p">Disperse and dreams of yet another sort</div>
<div class="p">His fanciful, romantic life support.</div>
<div class="p">Conscious, he shakes his head, with rippling mane,</div>
<div class="p">For Mr. Muscle is a fop and vain,</div>
<div class="p">His jaw clear-chiseled, and a god's physique.</div>
<div class="p">A morning mist bedews each lovely cheek</div>
<div class="p">Of a sweet goddess starting from repose</div>
<div class="p">As starts a kitten when a zephyr blows.</div>
<div class="p">And grace plays softly o'er her lustrous face,</div>
<div class="p">For she's a manufactory of grace.</div>
<div class="p">&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; Observe him bathe his ivory teeth with mint,</div>
<div class="p">And breathe and sigh to see their polished glint,</div>
<div class="p">And shuffle slipshod to a tonic shower,</div>
<div class="p">And his enormous, rippling muscles scour,</div>
<div class="p">And from the cool emerge into the day,</div>
<div class="p">And pull out in his father’s Chevrolet.</div>
<div class="p">&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; And, ladies, take example from the best!</div>
<div class="p">Behold a maiden fluttering from her nest;</div>
<div class="p">She rubs her cow-like eyes, assumes her place,</div>
<div class="p">And balances a cosmos on her face.</div>
<div class="p">&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; He roars into the Starbucks’ parking lot,</div>
<div class="p">And deftly swings his car into a spot,</div>
<div class="p">As leaping from her bike she locks it fast.</div>
<div class="p">He greets her, saying, “Was it you I passed?”</div>
<div class="p">He sweeps his bangs away, a heavy chore,</div>
<div class="p">And follows her gallantly through the door.</div>
<div class="p">There half the freshman class is drinking brew,</div>
<div class="p">And acting like adults, or trying to.</div>
<div class="p">He drinks his soy-milk latte with a straw</div>
<div class="p">And argues with a friend about the law,</div>
<div class="p">His arm across the chair, his head flung back,</div>
<div class="p">Now on defense, and now on the attack.</div>
<div class="p">She sits as on a throne, with earnest eyes</div>
<div class="p">Which drink the scene, and ears which drink the lies,</div>
<div class="p">And mouth which drinks the coffee;</div>
<div class="p">Then stands and flits across the crowded floor,</div>
<div class="p">And spies a slight acquaintance at the door,</div>
<div class="p">And runs, and melts into the girl’s embrace,</div>
<div class="p">A rapturous expression on her face.</div>
<div class="p">&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; As even Jove knew rivalry one time</div>
<div class="p">When haughty Titans tried his Mount to climb,</div>
<div class="p">So now our tender hero’s beard is pulled</div>
<div class="p">By a dome-shouldered boy’s ham-handed hold.</div>
<div class="p">Adonis had from law digressed and come</div>
<div class="p">To praise free speech as all man’s rights in sum.</div>
<div class="p">“And you should know, because your talk is cheap,”</div>
<div class="p">His rival said, and uttered not a peep.</div>
<div class="p">The whole room turned,</div>
<div class="p">To see if he’d be able to respond;</div>
<div class="p">Our hero is not dumb, though he is blond:</div>
<div class="p">“Did someone hear a grunt when I last spoke?”</div>
<div class="p">He said, and silence vanished at the joke.</div>
<div class="p">He pushed his hair, and grinned, content to hear,</div>
<div class="p">And let returning chatter bathe his ear.</div>
